README.md, before:

# YAdb
yet another database ![Test Status](https://github.com/iJustErikk/yadb/actions/workflows/cargo-test.yml/badge.svg)

making a db. with ~~rocksdb~~ ~~rust~~ ~~go/cockroachdb's pebble.~~ actually going back to rust, writing my own storage engine.

Update: the storage engine now provides a minimum functionality for implementing a database (minus iterators for sql-like dbs). need to improve performance (see concurrent design analysis). Putting this project on pause for a bit.

Motivation: I wish to better my system and data engineering skills. Data intensity will only increase. 

Lofty goals for this project: 
- Build lsm based kv store
- Build distributed kv engine
- Build single node sql database
- Build distributed sql database (with simple sql, maybe fuller sql syntax for non-distributed databases) like Cockroachdb
- (possibly) build b epsilon storage engine

## Running/testing/profiling LSM Based KV Storage Engine

Run `./setup.sh` to get started.

Run `cargo test` to run tests.

Run `cargo test split_bench` to run current benchmark.

Run `cargo flamegraph --test test_storage -- split_bench` to profile current benchmark.

Commit message:

cache design, onto adding caching!

README.md, after:

# YAdb
yet another database ![Test Status](https://github.com/iJustErikk/yadb/actions/workflows/cargo-test.yml/badge.svg)

making a db. with ~~rocksdb~~ ~~rust~~ ~~go/cockroachdb's pebble.~~ actually going back to rust, writing my own storage engine.

Update: the storage engine now provides a minimum functionality for implementing a database (minus iterators for sql-like dbs). Improved performance via batching WAL IO. Currently working on improving the API (don't hide copies, make them do it), adding caching to improve read performance and adding iterators (need to consider transactions first).

Motivation: I wish to better my system and data engineering skills. Data intensity will only increase. 

Lofty goals for this project: 
- Build lsm based kv store
- Build distributed kv engine
- Build single node sql database
- Build distributed sql database (with simple sql, maybe fuller sql syntax for non-distributed databases) like Cockroachdb
- (possibly) build b epsilon storage engine

## Running/testing/profiling LSM Based KV Storage Engine

Run `./setup.sh` to get started.

Run `cargo test` to run tests.

Run `cargo test split_bench` to run current benchmark.

Run `cargo flamegraph --test test_storage -- split_bench` to profile current benchmark.
